---
layout: post
title: APIs
author: SDGs team
category: "Data exchange"
excerpt: 
---

### Using APIs

Our UK SDG data site requires data files to be in a specific format. Reformatting available data into this format is labour intensive. We are looking to automate the process of updating the data we report. This will enable us to focus on identifying sources and developing new methods instead.

We are working with Application Programming Interfaces (APIs). They allow two software applications to communicate. Websites across the internet use APIs to automate updates and changes.

We want to use APIs that will work with data published online somewhere else. For example, the ONS Gross Domestic Product (GDP) per head time series has a supporting API which makes the data available in a format we can use.

We have written software program code to:

*	Enable our data site to link with APIs used by other websites reporting data
*	Calculate the relevant new figures
*	Format the results so they are usable on our site
*	Print our indicator files ready to go on our site

We have been able to cut down the work we do to process updates to the data we report on our site. We are using APIs to update 15 different indicators, currently. By automating these updates, we can report the latest data faster too.

We are updating SDG data with APIs that communicate with ONS websites so far. We are investigating which other websites we can connect to using APIs in the future.


If you want to know more about how we collect data using APIs please <i class="fa fa-envelope"></i> [email us at SustainableDevelopment@ons.gov.uk](mailto:SustainableDevelopment@ons.gov.uk).
