---
layout: post
title: Use of non-official sources for SDG reporting
author: SDGs team
category: "Data sources"
excerpt: 
---
In July we published a detailed outline of our approach to assessing the quality and suitability of statistics from non-official sources for SDG reporting. We produced a [transparent protocol](https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/environmentalaccounts/methodologies/uksustainabledevelopmentgoalsuseofnonofficialsources) with a simple scoring system based on the pillars of the UKSA [Code of Practice for Statistics](https://code.statisticsauthority.gov.uk/the-code/) and critical SDG characteristics. Putting this protocol in place was the result of collaborative work and feedback from across the GSS. It allows us to safely expand our breadth of sources beyond official statistics without compromising on quality. As a result, we could reach more vulnerable populations and environments through filling in outstanding headline and disaggregation gaps, making sure no-one and no-where is left behind.  

In brief, the structure of the protocol includes an initial pass or fail gateway with essential criteria. These criteria cover ethics and privacy, transparency and accountability, and need. If the source gets a pass on all of these, it proceeds to be scored on a scale of 0 (not acceptable) to 3 (high score) along criteria of relevance, methods, coverage, timeliness and ongoing availability, data journey awareness, and quality assurance. A statistical output from a non-official source with an average score of over 1.5 and no scores of 0 is considered appropriate to use towards SDG reporting on the National Reporting Platform. Using this system, we can see where strengths and weaknesses lie for each potential data source. 

With the help of this protocol, we have assessed the non-official sources on our platform and confirmed they are fit for purpose. We also have a few more lined up in the process, but we haven’t used them for reporting yet. For example, we are looking to fill sub-indicator headline gaps for [indicator 6.6.1](https://sdgdata.gov.uk/6-6-1/) using National River Flow Archive data and British Geological Survey data. Also, potential fills for headline gaps for [indicator 14.1.1](https://sdgdata.gov.uk/14-1-1/) (Marine Conservation Society beach litter data). Some of these sources have already been assessed, and for others we need to gather more information. 

In the [original publication](https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/environmentalaccounts/methodologies/uksustainabledevelopmentgoalsuseofnonofficialsources) we emphasised that when it comes to non-official sources we would prioritise headline gaps, and committed to outline a set of priorities for filling disaggregation gaps. This measure was put in place as a risk management in the case of multiple non-official producers getting in touch to provide us with data for SDG reporting. Here we state that if we are in a position where we need to prioritise, this will be done based on disaggregations explicitly mentioned in the indicator’s title. For example, if the indicator has a required disaggregation by age or sex, we will prioritise non-official sources that help to fill those gaps at the expense of a non-official source that provides age or sex (or another disaggregation) for an indicator that does not explicitly require this breakdown in its title. However, if we are in a position where resource is not an issue, we will aim to fill any available disaggregation or headline gap. 

This protocol for assessment of non-official sources has gathered a lot of interest internationally, and we have shared lessons learnt and appropriate resources with other NSIs and through dissemination across various UN forums. It is an on-going piece of work, so we will likely update and refine it in the future as we get to use it more. We also plan to publish a variant for assessment of non-official qualitative sources relevant to SDGs. Some user research has already been done in this area, and we know there is an appetite for contextual information on the indicators. As always, we welcome any feedback and suggestions.
