---
indicator: 3.2.2
method_of_computation: >-
  Number of children who died during the first 28 days of life / Number of live
  births Method of measurement Data from civil registration: The number of live
  births and the number of neonatal deaths are used to calculate age_ specific
  rates. This system provides annual data. Data from household surveys:
  Calculations are based on full birth history, whereby women are asked for the
  date of birth of each of their children, whether each child is still alive and
  if not the age at death. Method of estimation The United Nation Inter_agency
  Group for Child Mortality Estimation (UN_IGME) produces neonatal mortality
  rate estimates with a Bayesian spline regression model which models the ratio
  of neonatal mortality rate / (under_five mortality rate'_'neonatal mortality
  rate). Estimates of NMR are obtained by recombining the estimates of the ratio
  with UN IGME_estimated under_five mortality rate. See UN IGME for more
  details. Predominant type of statistics: adjusted and estimated. These
  neonatal mortality rates have been estimated by applying methods to the
  available data from all Member States in order to ensure comparability across
  countries and time; hence they are not necessarily the same as the official
  national data.
indicator_definition: >-
  Probability that a child born in a specific year or period will die during the
  first 28 completed days of life if subject to age_specific mortality rates of
  that period, expressed per 1000 live births. Neonatal deaths (deaths among
  live births during the first 28 completed days of life) may be subdivided into
  early neonatal deaths, occurring during the first 7 days of life, and late
  neonatal deaths, occurring after the 7th day but before the 28th completed day
  of life.
target: >-
  By 2030, end preventable deaths of newborns and children under 5 years of age,
  with all countries aiming to reduce neonatal mortality to at least as low as
  12 per 1,000 live births and under-5 mortality to at least as low as 25 per
  1,000 live births.
indicator_name: Neonatal mortality rate
title: Neonatal mortality rate
permalink: /3-2-2/
sdg_goal: 3
graph_type_description: Line graph
graph_status_notes: Graphed
layout: indicator
un_designated_tier: '1'
un_custodial_agency: UNICEF
indicator_variable: neonatal_mortalityrate
graph: longitudinal
variable_description: null
variable_notes: null
target_id: '3.2'
has_metadata: true
goal_meta_link: 'http://unstats.un.org/sdgs/files/metadata-compilation/Metadata-Goal-3.pdf'
goal_meta_link_text: UN Metadata
goal_meta_link_page: 6
source_title: null
source_notes: null
published: true
actual_indicator_available: Neonatal mortality rate
date_of_national_source_publication: 19.04.2016
actual_indicator_available_description: >-
  Indicator of number of infant deaths that occur during the neonatal period
  (first 27 days of life)
time_period: 'Calendar Year (Occurrences within the calendar year) '
periodicity: Annual
unit_of_measure: 'Deaths per 1,000 live births '
disaggregation_categories: >-
  Sex (upon request), age of mother, ethnicity by  mother's country of birth,
  race by mother's country of birth (by request),  Marital status, birthweight,
  gestational age, number of previous children, place of delivery,
  socio-economic status of parents, ethnicity of baby as stated by mother (on
  request), early neonatal (under 7 days), neonatal (under 28 days), late
  neonatal (between 7 and 27 days), postnatal (between 28 days and 1 year),
  infant (under 1 year) and childhood (between 1 and 15 years)
national_geographical_coverage: 'UK, England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland'
comments_limitations: >-
  The headline figures for this indicator cover the United Kingdom however the
  disaggregation for this indicator do not cover England, Wales, Scotland and
  Northern Ireland they only cover England and Wales jointly. The exception to
  this is when regions of England and the regions of Wales are specified.
  Although the headline figures go back to 2000 for neonatal, early neonatal,
  post neonatal, and infant other disaggregation for the indicator only go as
  far back as 2008.   The disaggregation of socio-economic status is only shown
  by type of marital status and type of registration. The classification used
  for socio-economic status is the National Statistics Socio-economic
  Classification.
source_active_1: true
source_url_1: >-
  https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/datasets/childmortalitystatisticschildhoodinfantandperinatalchildhoodinfantandperinatalmortalityinenglandandwales
source_url_text_1: 'Childhood mortality in England and Wales '
source_active_2: false
source_active_3: false
graph_type: Longitudinal
source_url_text_2: Link to Source
source_url_3: Link to Source
national_indicator_available: 'Neonatal Mortality rate '
national_indicator_description: >-
  Probability that a child born in a specific year or period will die during the
  first 28 completed days of life if subject to age-specific mortality rates of
  that period, expressed per 1000 live births. Neonatal deaths (deaths among
  live births during the first 28 completed days of life) may be subdivided into
  early neonatal deaths, occurring during the first 7 days of life, and late
  neonatal deaths, occurring after the 7th day but before the 28th completed day
  of life.
national_indicator_periodicity: Annual
national_earliest_available_data: '1981'
computation_disaggregation: >-
  Age, birth weight, place of usual residence, sex by country of occurrence,
  socio-economic status by type of marital status, and type of registration. 
computation_units: 'Number of deaths per 1,000  '
computation_calculations: >-
  No calculations were performed in the data acquisition of this indicator as
  appropriate data was readily available in the final format specified by this
  indicator. For insight into the details of potential calculations please refer
  to the original source metadata or source contact. A basic summary of the
  concept  behind the formation of the indicator is as follows:  The number of
  neonatal deaths divided by the number of births in the same time period and
  this will be multiplied by 1,000 to get a rate that gives a figure per
  thousand births. 
computation_numerator: Number of neonatal deaths × 100
computation_denominator: 'Number of live births '
source_organisation_1: Office for National Statistics
source_periodicity_1: 'Annual '
source_earliest_available_1: '1981'
source_geographical_coverage_1: 'UK, England, Wales, Scotland, and Northern Ireland'
source_release_date_1: '2017-04-20'
source_statistical_classification_1: 'National statistic '
source_contact_1: 'Vasita Patel vsob@ons.gsi.gov.uk  Telephone: +44 (0)1329 444110'
source_other_info_1: >-
  Executive summary

  Child mortality statistics presents figures and rates on stillbirths, infant
  deaths (under 1 year of age) and childhood deaths (between 1 and 15 years of
  age) occurring annually in England and Wales. It also contains historical data
  back to 1921. The statistics are derived from information recorded when births
  and deaths are registered in England and Wales as part of civil registration,
  a legal requirement.

  Some tables are based on infant deaths that have been successfully linked to
  their corresponding birth records. This linkage enables analysis of risk
  factors and other demographic characteristics collected at birth registration
  including: birthweight, mother’s age at birth of child, mother’s country of
  birth, marital status, number of previous children and parents’ socio-economic
  status.

  The Birth cohort tables for infant deaths present data on infant deaths for
  those babies that were born in a reference year and died before their first
  birthday. The tables also provide data by some of the risk factors affecting
  infant deaths derived from linking the death to the corresponding birth
  registration record.

  Child mortality statistics and Birth cohort tables for infant deaths replaced
  the annual reference volume Mortality statistics: childhood, infant and
  perinatal (DH3) in 2010. The current releases contain selected tables from
  DH3, although some tables have been amended to improve presentation.

  More information about the certification and registration of childhood and
  infant deaths can be found in a User guide to Child mortality statistics. More
  general information on the collection, production and quality of mortality
  data is available in Mortality metadata. Additional information on the
  collection and quality of data for births can be found in Births metadata.

  This document contains the following sections:

  • Output quality

  • About the output

  • How the output is created

  • Validation and quality assurance

  • Coherence and comparability

  • Concepts and definitions

   Quality and Methodology Information' (QMI) replaced 'Summary Quality
  Reports' (SQR) from April 2011 2

  • Other information, relating to quality trade-offs and user needs

  • Sources for further information or advice

  Output quality

  This document contains a range of information that describes the quality of
  the data and details any points that should be noted when using the output.
  The Office for National Statistics (ONS) has developed Guidelines for
  measuring statistical quality; these are based upon the 5 European Statistical
  System (ESS) Quality Dimensions. This document addresses these quality
  dimensions and other important quality characteristics, which are:

  • Relevance • Timeliness and punctuality • Coherence and comparability •
  Accuracy • Output quality trade-offs • Assessment of user needs and
  perceptions • Accessibility and clarity

  More information is provided about these quality dimensions in the following
  sections.

  About the output

  Relevance (The degree to which statistical outputs meet users’ needs.)

  These statistics are based on details collected when deaths are certified and
  registered. The live births and stillbirths information is based largely on
  the details collected when births are registered.

  The statistics present the numbers of births and deaths that occurred in the
  reference year and the corresponding rates. Figures are published for live
  births, stillbirths, infant mortality and childhood mortality.

  Births and deaths of all residents of England and Wales that occur and are
  registered outside of England and Wales are excluded. Births and deaths
  registered in England and Wales of persons whose usual residence is outside
  England and Wales are included for any total figures for England and Wales,
  but are excluded from any sub-division of England and Wales.

  The published tables of data are accompanied by a statistical bulletin which
  provides analysis and context. The User guide to Child mortality statistics
  and Mortality metadata provide further information on the collection,
  production and quality of mortality data.

  Age at death is broken down into the broad categories:

  • Stillbirth – born after 24 or more weeks completed gestation and which did
  not, at any time, breathe or show signs of life • Early neonatal (deaths under
  7 days) • Neonatal (deaths under 28 days) • Late neonatal (deaths between 7
  and 27 days) • Postneonatal (deaths between 28 days and 1 year) • Infant
  (deaths under 1 year) • Childhood (deaths between 1 and 15 years of age)

  Stillbirths and Infant deaths are published by:

  • age of mother at the time the child was born, providing a useful comparison
  between younger and older age groups of mothers

  • birthweight, presented as a grouped variable to draw distinction between
  death rates for low and normal birthweight babies 3

  • marital status of the parents as recorded at the birth registration (inside
  or outside marriage) and registration type (joint or sole registration)

  • National Statistics Socio-economic classification (NS-SEC) as defined by
  occupation. For further information on socio-economic classification as
  defined by occupation, refer to section 2.13 of a User guide to Child
  mortality statistics. Additional information is given in the Coherence and
  comparability section in this report

  • ONS cause of death group. A hierarchical classification of cause groups
  using the International Classification of Diseases (ICD)-10 has been developed
  to derive a single cause group for neonatal deaths and stillbirths. The
  classification enables direct comparison of stillbirths, neonatal and
  postneonatal deaths. This would not otherwise be possible due to differences
  in the way the cause of death for stillbirths and neonates is recorded at
  registration. This is the result of the introduction of a special death
  certificate for stillbirths and neonates in 1986. The ONS cause groups allow
  the death to be assigned to a category based on the likely timing of the
  damage leading to the death. For further information on the ONS cause of death
  groups hierarchical classification, refer to section 2.10 of a User guide to
  Child mortality statistics or see Causes of neonatal deaths and stillbirths: a
  new hierarchical classification in ICD-10

  • number of previous children born to the mother

  • place of delivery

  Postneonatal and childhood deaths are also presented by broad underlying cause
  of death groups. The cause of death information is based on the details
  collected when the death is certified and registered. The selection of the
  underlying cause of death for deaths at ages 28 days and over is based on ICD
  rules and is made from the condition or conditions reported by the certifier,
  as recorded on the Medical Certificate of Cause of Death. For further
  information on coding the underlying cause of death at age 28 days and over,
  refer to section 2.8 of a User guide to Child mortality statistics.

  The Department of Health (DH) and Welsh Government (WG) are key users of child
  mortality statistics. Reducing deaths in babies and young children is included
  within the NHS Outcomes Framework 2014 to 2015. DH and WG use the data to
  understand trends in key risks for infant mortality, such as age of mother,
  gestational age, birthweight, marital status, number of previous children and
  parents’ socio-economic status. Understanding why children are dying is vital
  in order to make policy changes that have an impact on the infant mortality
  rate.

  Other users of this output include academics, independent researchers of
  infant mortality, charities and the media.

  There are also 2 specific users of the birth cohort data. The Department of
  Midwifery and Child Health, City University London; and Public Health England
  (PHE) who produce information, data and intelligence on people's health at a
  local level. These key users utilise a long time series of birth cohort data
  in their analyses and provide further analyses by key risk factors affecting
  stillbirths and infant deaths, including age of mother and birthweight.

  Timeliness and punctuality (Timeliness refers to the lapse of time between
  publication and the period to which the data refer. Punctuality refers to the
  gap between planned and actual publication dates.)

  Child mortality statistics for a given year are published annually, around
  13-16 months after the end of the reference year. As these figures use deaths
  occurring in a reference year, the annual data extract must be taken some
  months after the end of the data year to allow for late registrations. Deaths
  that are referred to the coroner may take several weeks or months before they
  are registered. Therefore, sufficient time is allowed to receive as many death
  registrations as possible, before the annual dataset is taken. Any late
  registrations received following the extraction of the death occurrence subset
  for a reference year are not included in published figures.

  Birth cohort tables for infant deaths are published annually, around 25-28
  months after the end of the data year. These figures are based on births
  occurring in a reference year, linked to subsequent infant deaths within one
  year of birth.

  The annual release of the Child Mortality figures is announced on the GOV.UK
  release calendar at least four weeks in advance. From 2013, the Birth cohort
  tables for infant deaths have been published at the same time as Child
  Mortality Statistics, although figures are for the preceding births data year.

  For more details on related releases, the GOV.UK release calendar is available
  online and provides 12 months’ advance notice of release dates. In the
  unlikely event of a change to the preannounced release schedule, public
  attention will be drawn to the change and the reasons for the change will be
  explained fully at the same time, as set out in the Code of Practice for
  Official Statistics.

  How the output is created

  Child mortality statistics are based on information collected at the
  registration of a birth or an infant death. Where possible, infant deaths have
  been linked to their corresponding birth record to obtain information on
  social and biological factors of the baby and parents.

  The denominators used to calculate rates for stillbirths and infant deaths are
  births that occurred in the same year, that is, the true population at risk.
  For childhood mortality (deaths between 1 and 15 years of age), the
  denominators are the mid-year population estimates of the resident population
  in England and Wales for the reference year; the most up to date estimates at
  the time of production are used.

  More detailed information on the main processes used in the compilation of
  mortality and birth statistics and on the accuracy and quality of the data
  used are available in Mortality metadata and Births metadata. Rates are not
  calculated where there are fewer than 3 deaths in a cell, denoted by (u). It
  is ONS practice not to calculate rates where there are fewer than 3 deaths in
  a cell, as rates based on such low numbers are susceptible to inaccurate
  interpretation.

  Rates which are based on between 3 and 19 deaths are displayed in tables but
  are denoted (u) as a warning to the user that their reliability as a measure
  may be affected by the small number of events.

  Some data items collected under the Population Statistics Acts (PSA) 1938,
  1960 and 2012 have been aggregated to protect confidentiality. Occasionally,
  it has been necessary to apply secondary suppression to avoid the possibility
  of disclosure by differencing. Some of the figures in some tables may not add
  precisely due to rounding or suppression.

  The ONS policy on protecting confidentiality in birth and death statistics is
  available on the ONS website.

  Validation and quality assurance Accuracy (The degree of closeness between an
  estimate and the true value.)

  Information recorded at birth and death registration in England and Wales
  passes through a number of processes before becoming usable for analysis. The
  ONS publication Mortality metadata provides additional information on the
  collection, processing and quality of mortality data for England and Wales.
  More specific information relating to stillbirths and infant deaths is
  available in a User guide to Child mortality statistics. Births metadata
  provides detailed information on the registration, collection and quality of
  births data in England and Wales.

  The accuracy of information contained in the draft birth entry is the
  responsibility of the informant(s), usually the mother, or the mother and
  father where the registration is a joint one outside marriage. Wilfully
  supplying false information may render the informant(s) liable to prosecution
  for perjury. It is believed that, in general, the information supplied by the
  informant(s) is correct.

  Occasionally, birth information might be missing from an entry. This can occur
  for a number of reasons including the informant refusing to give information,
  or the informant not knowing the information. Under the Population Statistics
  Act, certain confidential data items are collected at the registration of a
  birth. If any of these data items are missing, an appropriate value is
  imputed. More information on the imputation of missing births data can be
  found in section 1.3 of the Births 5 metadata. The number of birth records
  missing age of parents’ can be found in section 2.9. For years prior to 2012,
  the number of records missing information on previous live-born children can
  be found in section 2.13.

  For deaths, other than the cause of death (including a stillbirth), additional
  information is supplied to the registrar by the informant when the death is
  registered. For deaths certified after inquest, the coroner, police officers
  or other witnesses may supply this information, which cannot later be checked
  by the registrar.

  When a birth or death is registered, the registration system provides the
  opportunity for the registrar to make validation checks at the point of
  registration, therefore improving the quality of the data. Internal
  consistency checks are conducted by ONS to eliminate any errors made in the
  supply and recording of birth and death records. Checks are more frequent on
  those records with extreme values for key variables (such as age of mother and
  father), as these have a greater impact on published statistics. A small
  number of registrations are raised with the General Register Office (GRO) on a
  monthly basis for verification.

  Some tables in Child mortality statistics show the latest figures for infant
  deaths that occurred in a given year, while others are based on infant deaths
  that occurred in a given year and which have been successfully linked to their
  corresponding birth record. The Birth cohort tables for infant deaths are
  births occurring in a reference year which have been successfully linked to
  their corresponding death registration record for those babies who died before
  their first birthday.

  Around 2% of infant deaths cannot be linked to a birth record. The main
  reasons for this are either that a birth record cannot be found, or the birth
  was registered outside England and Wales. Further information on the linkage
  process is available in section 2.12 of a User guide to Child mortality
  statistics.

  Any late registrations received following the extraction of the death
  occurrence subset for a reference year are not included in published figures.
  See Timeliness and punctuality section for further information.

  Coherence and comparability (Coherence is the degree to which data that are
  derived from different sources or methods, but refer to the same topic, are
  similar. Comparability is the degree to which data can be compared over time
  and domain, for example, geographic level.)

  General

  Following an evaluation of the suite of mortality releases in summer 2012,
  further rationalisation of infant mortality products has taken place to avoid
  confusion for users and to minimise the variation in infant mortality figures
  from the use of different datasets. ONS has discontinued Infant and perinatal
  mortality by social and biological factors which contained very similar
  tables. To ensure the tables continue to best meet user needs, a few small
  changes to existing tables have also been made. These were outlined in the
  Statistical Bulletin: Childhood Mortality Statistics: Childhood, Infant and
  Perinatal, 2013.

  The linkage of birth and infant death records has been conducted since 1975 to
  obtain information on the social and biological factors of the baby and
  parents, as registered on the birth record. Over the years there have been
  significant changes in the way some of the risk factor variables have been
  coded. Therefore, comparability over time is limited for some variables.

  On 1 October 1992, the legal definition of a stillbirth was changed from a
  baby born dead after 28 or more weeks completed gestation to one born dead
  after 24 or more weeks completed gestation. This means that figures for
  stillbirths from 1993 are not comparable with those for previous years. The
  effect of this change on figures for 1992 is analysed in the annual volume of
  birth statistics for that year (Office of Population, Censuses and Surveys
  (OPCS) 1994).

  In 1986, following recommendation from the World Health Organisation (WHO) of
  a change of format of the certificate to include maternal conditions, ONS
  introduced new certificates for registering neonatal deaths and stillbirths in
  England and Wales. This allowed certifiers more flexibility in the number and
  ordering of the causes given, however, this made it impossible to either
  derive a single underlying cause of death (for neonatal deaths and
  stillbirths) or to compare with cause of death for postneonatal deaths, which
  are certified on the standard death certificate. For this reason, a
  hierarchical classification, known as ONS cause groups, was developed for
  stillbirths 6 and neonatal deaths to identify a single underlying “mechanism”
  which led to death. A computer algorithm directs any mention, in the case of
  neonatal deaths, and underlying cause in the case of postneonatal deaths, to
  the first appropriate cause group. However, for the data years 2001 to 2012,
  postneonatal deaths were assigned to the ONS cause groups based on mentions
  rather than underlying cause. We undertook some analysis of the impact of this
  change, the results showed that it was negligible. Further information on this
  analysis is available on request from vsob@ons.gsi.gov.uk. Stillbirths and
  infant mortality data by ONS cause groups are not available prior to 1993.

  The Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 2008 contained provisions enabling
  2 females in a same-sex couple to register a birth from 1 September 2009. Due
  to the small numbers, births registered to a same-sex couple in a civil
  partnership are included with marital births, while births registered to a
  same-sex couple outside a civil partnership are included with births outside
  marriage. Tables are footnoted to show the number of births to same-sex
  couples included with marital and non-marital births. Given the relatively
  small numbers of births registered to same sex couples, the impact on
  statistics is negligible.

  Cause of death

  Information on cause of death in England and Wales has been coded to ICD-10
  since January 2001. ICD-10 was implemented on the recommendation of WHO and
  replaced ICD-9, which had been in use since 1979. Further information on
  changes in ICD-10 and comparability between ICD- 9 and ICD-10 is available on
  the ONS website.

  In January 2011 ONS switched from using ICD-10 v2001.2 to use V2010. A
  bulletin presenting the main findings from a Bridge Coding Study of 2009
  Stillbirth and Neonatal Death Registrations (in which deaths were
  independently coded using v2001.2 and v2010), is available to help users
  understand the impact of this change on perinatal mortality statistics for
  England and Wales. The impact of ICD–10 v2010 on other deaths has been
  investigated in a separate study.

  On 1 January 2014, ONS changed the software used to code cause of death from
  the Medical Mortality Data Software (MMDS) to IRIS. The new IRIS software
  version 2013 incorporates official updates to ICD-10 that are approved by WHO.
  The use of the IRIS software has helped improve the international
  comparability of mortality statistics. For stillbirths and neonatal deaths,
  any maternal condition mentioned on the death certificate will be coded to the
  P Chapter (certain conditions originating in the perinatal period) rather than
  elsewhere in the ICD classification. Previously, these deaths may have been
  coded to the O chapter (pregnancy, childbirth and the puerperium). The 2014
  registrations of stillbirths and neonates that occurred in 2013 were recoded
  to ensure comparability within the 2013 occurrences dataset. Although this
  change was implemented on 1 January 2014, there were a very small number of
  infant deaths that occurred in 2013 and were registered in 2014, that were
  affected by the change.

  Further information on IRIS can be found on the ONS website. There is also a
  study that looks into the impact of the coding changes on stillbirths and
  neonatal deaths.

  Additional details on specific historical changes to the collection and coding
  of mortality data are published under section 3.4 of Mortality metadata.

  Country of birth

  A new coding system for country of birth was introduced in 2006 and was used
  to code mother’s and father’s country of birth. The National Statistics
  country classification is based on the International Standard Organisation
  (ISO) 3166 Codes for the Representation of Names of Countries and their
  Subdivisions, adapted to meet data needs of United Kingdom National
  Statistics' users and producers.

  Socio-economic classification

  Over the years the source of information on father’s social class has
  undergone numerous changes. Since 2001, the National Statistics Socio-economic
  classification (NS-SEC) has been used for all official statistics and surveys.
  It replaced Social Class (SC) based on Occupation (formerly Registrar
  General's Social Class) and Socio-economic Groups (SEG). This change was
  agreed by the National Statistician following a major review of government
  social classifications 7 commissioned in 1994 and carried out by the Economic
  and Social Research Council. In 2011, NSSEC was rebased on the new Standard
  Occupational Classification (SOC2010). The new classification is based not on
  skills but on employment conditions, which are now considered to be central to
  describing the socio-economic structure of modern societies.

  Up until the 2011 data year, child mortality and birth statistics were
  published based on father’s NSSEC. Historically, the decision to use father’s
  NS-SEC was based on the premise that many mothers either did not have a paid
  occupation or choose not to state their occupational details at birth
  registration. From the 2012 data year, the combined method for reporting
  NS-SEC for birth and child mortality statistics (using the most advantaged
  NS-SEC of either parent and creating a household level classification rather
  than just using the father’s classification) has been used instead. These
  changes mean that figures from the 2012 data year onwards are not directly
  comparable with previous years.

  Previous children

  Amendments to the Population (Statistics) Act 1938 mean that, from May 2012,
  information is now collected at all birth registrations on the total numbers
  of previous live births and previous stillbirths that the mother has had (not
  just those with the current or former husband). This has simplified the
  question asked by registrars and provides improved coverage. A paper
  describing the changes that have occurred to our birth statistics as a result
  of improvements to the Population Statistics Act is available on our website.
  It provides background to the changes and provides high-level findings from
  the new data collected in 2012 and 2013.

  The difference, between the old and new data, in the proportion of married
  women reporting previous births is larger than was expected purely from the
  question change. More information can be found in this methodology paper on
  Quality assurance of new data on birth registrations, as a result of changes
  to the Population Statistics Act – from May 2012 onwards.

  An investigation of childbearing by registration status in England and Wales,
  using birth registration data for 2012 and 2013 examines the patterns and
  characteristics in birth registrations following the improvements to the data
  collected at birth registration. The principal characteristics explored in the
  paper relate to whether a woman has been previously married, and whether the
  birth is the mother’s first child or subsequent child.

  Only minor changes have been made to published tables for 2012 and 2013 since
  the first full year of new data in 2013 but some childhood deaths in this year
  will relate to births in 2012 prior to the changes being implemented. The main
  improvements resulting from the amendments to the Population (Statistics) Act
  1938 have been introduced to published tables for child deaths occurring in
  2014. Figures for 2014 onwards are not comparable with previous years.

  UK comparability

  For mortality data for other UK countries, please see stillbirths and infant
  deaths in Scotland and stillbirths and infant deaths in Northern Ireland.
  These figures are comparable with those for England and Wales.

  Concepts and definitions (Concepts and definitions describe the legislation
  governing the output and a description of the classifications used in the
  output.)

  Since 1 September 1992 a stillbirth has been defined as, “a child which has
  issued forth from its mother after the 24th week of pregnancy, and which did
  not at any time after becoming completely expelled from its mother breathe or
  show other signs of life”. Prior to this, a stillbirth was as above, but at 28
  or more weeks completed gestation. See Coherence and comparability section for
  further information.

  For information on the categories of infant deaths based on age (for example
  neonatal and postneonatal) see Relevance section.

  Amendments to the Population (Statistics) Act 1938 mean that from May 2012,
  information is now collected at all birth registrations on the total numbers
  of previous live births and previous stillbirths that the mother has had
  (previously information was only collected for married women and only 8
  included previous children with the current or former husband). This has
  simplified the question asked by registrars and provides improved coverage.

  Plurality refers to the total number of live births and stillbirths at the
  maternity.

  The rates used in the tables are outlined in Section 2.7 of a User guide to
  Child mortality statistics.

  The existing provisions for the registration of deaths and the processing,
  reporting and analysis of mortality can be found in Mortality metadata.

  Other information Output quality trade-offs (Trade-offs are the extent to
  which different dimensions of quality are balanced against each other.)

  Child mortality statistics and the Birth cohort tables are based on the date
  the death occurred rather than the date on which it was registered. Although
  this means that there is a delay in the publication of these statistics to
  allow for late death registrations, there are a number of advantages of using
  death occurrences over registrations. The long history of infant mortality
  statistics as a key indicator of the health of the nation is based on
  occurrence data (as defined by WHO). See section 2.2 of Mortality metadata for
  further information.

  Assessment of user needs and perceptions (The processes for finding out about
  uses and users, and their views on the statistical products.)

  A user consultation to review infant mortality statistics took place between 5
  July and 16 August 2011 and the ONS response to the review is available.

  A feedback survey for the Birth cohort tables took place in July 2011 and
  results and responses to this survey are available on our website.

  A proposal for changes to birth statistics by socio-economic classification
  was published on the ONS website in February 2013. No feedback was received so
  the outlined changes were implemented.

  Proposed changes to Child mortality statistics were outlined in the Child
  Mortality Statistics, 2011 bulletin (published February 2013) and user
  feedback was requested. Very little feedback was received so the proposed
  changes have been implemented.

  All Child mortality statistical bulletins seek feedback from users. User
  feedback is also requested at the bottom of all e-mails sent by customer
  service teams within the Vital Statistics Outputs Branch.

  ONS also receive feedback through regular attendance at user group meetings
  and conferences.

  Sources of further information or advice Accessibility and clarity
  (Accessibility is the ease with which users are able to access the data, also
  reflecting the format in which the data are available and the availability of
  supporting information. Clarity refers to the quality and sufficiency of the
  release details, illustrations and accompanying advice.)

  The latest figures on Child mortality statistics and the Birth cohort tables
  for infant deaths can be accessed free of charge on our website. A Statistical
  Bulletin containing context and commentary accompanies the release. The
  bulletin describes the key trends looking at age-specific mortality rates and
  reports on the latest statistics on stillbirths and infant deaths.

  ONS's recommended format for accessible content is a combination of HTML
  webpages for narrative, charts and graphs, with data being provided in usable
  formats such as CSV and Excel. The ONS website also offers users the option to
  download the narrative in PDF format. In some instances other software may be
  used, or may be available on request. Available formats for content published
  on the ONS website but not produced by ONS, or referenced on the ONS website
  but stored elsewhere, may vary. For further information, please refer to the
  contact details at the beginning of this document.

  For information regarding conditions of access to data, please refer to these
  links:

  • terms and conditions (for data on the website) • Accessibility

  Special extracts and tabulations of child mortality data for England and Wales
  are available to order (subject to legal frameworks, disclosure control,
  resources and our charging policy, where appropriate). Such enquiries should
  be made to Vital Statistics Outputs Branch (vsob@ons.gsi.gov.uk or telephone:
  +44 (0)1329 444 110). All user requested data will be published onto the
  website.

  Access to microdata and disclosive data, that is, data which have the
  potential to identify an individual record, requires the approval of the ONS
  Microdata Release Procedure (MRP) before the data can be provided.

  Useful links

  • Child mortality statistics - statistics on stillbirths, infant deaths and
  childhood deaths occurring in a given year in England and Wales. • Birth
  cohort tables for infant deaths - deaths of infants born in a given calendar
  year using additional data from the birth record. • Pregnancy and ethnic
  factors influencing births and infant mortality (previously called Gestation
  specific mortality) - live births and infant deaths by gestational age. •
  Unexplained deaths in infancy - both sudden infant deaths and deaths for which
  the cause remained unknown or unascertained.

  The Vital statistics: population and health reference tables provide annual
  infant mortality data for the United Kingdom and its constituent countries
  (based on deaths registered in a year). For data for other UK countries please
  see the latest infant death statistics for Northern Ireland and the latest
  infant death statistics for Scotland.

  Summary data for infant mortality in England and Wales (based on deaths
  registered in the year), are available in the Deaths registrations summary
  tables. A geographical breakdown of infant death numbers and rates by local
  authority and county (based on deaths registered in a year) is available in
  Deaths registered in England and Wales by area of usual residence.

  The Births summary tables, England and Wales provide key summary statistics
  for live births in England and Wales.

  More general information on the collection, production and quality of
  mortality data is available in Mortality metadata.
---
